Yeah, I thought I'll ask her some questions about John again, because we're just
speaking about it, in particular with this, the word Parimukan, and watching your mouth,
which my mother used to tell me.
Yes, I secluded from essential pleasures, secluded from unholy some states, he bides in the
first genre, which is accompanied by thinking and pondering. So, if one does not
appropriate one's mouth, that area, that's what you were saying the other day.
Why is that? How is that getting you to join us? How does that help? Well, I think we discussed
a few days ago as well. He was basically the presence of the mouth, as an organ, you
can say, but basically the presence of a mouth is a phenomenon in your experience, in your
general experience or daily experience, the presence of that mouth basically, it's an entry
point for the mind towards the body. It's a point of convergence, so to speak. So, in
your experience as a whole, the experience that has this physical body present and all the
possibility of the physical action, verbal action, mental action, the domain of the body
and the domain of the mind, the entry point, so to speak, I mean, the mind doesn't really
enter the body, but in terms of the relationship and the mind is directed towards the body, it's
the phenomenon of the mouth, that's that first point. So, if you have taken up your mouth,
so to speak, if you assumed it to be yours, which implies all the possibilities based
on that mouth, eye, speech, and anything that can be said or any form of manipulation
that can come out of that, if you have taken up the mouth, means you've taken up the
whole domain of the body. I suppose you can say the door, I just, you obviously
need to be qualified because it's not that you actually enter through that door, but
yes, it's the, it's the, it's the, it's the, it's the first point of reference. So,
to speak, between the relationship, in the relationship between the mind and the body.
So, if you establish mindfulness in regard to the phenomenon of the mouth, in your experience,
basically, you're then guarded by that or you're protected by anything that can come from
the lower point, which is anything that's based on the bodily domain, because the mind
hasn't appropriated the point of convergence, means anything else that converges, it won't
affect you. So, it's basically, yeah, like, like, finding, finding a gateway and then
guarding that, and the gateway towards the domain of the body is the phenomenon of the
mouth, verbal, verbal involvement, nonverbal involvement, possibility of verbal involvement.
All of them are basically, by giving into them or by appropriating them, you are kind
of your mind is sort of descending towards the body, towards the body, actions towards
anything that can pertain to the body. So, if the mind is established in regard to the
phenomenon of the mouth, say in the first jhana, then basically, you are secluded from
anything bodily, in a sense of anything that can arise on account of the five senses.
So, in what way do you, God, how do you, how do you be mindful of the mouth?
Well, exactly, you need to recognize it as a phenomenon. There is no more straightforward
way of describing it, because it's a, it's a peripheral negative, because the presence
of the mouth is negative in regard to the act of speech, or any bodily act, or act of
consumption. So, you need to see this such. So, you don't actually have to go speaking
in order to discern the verbal domain on the contrary. You actually don't speak in order
for that negative to be discerned, negative of the mouth, which is basically, you can,
just a different way of say, the possibility of speech, the possibility of involvement,
the possibility of verbal action, or then come from that. But, it's all rooted down in
a physical fact that you have mouth present right there in your face, that can be used
and, like, see, I mean, I'm uttering words. I'm saying things. I'm designating terms.
But that's all material, so to speak, my mouth. The sounds you hear as well, as as vibrations,
frequencies, whatever they could respond to your ear. It's all on the level of body and
matter. Yet, it's basically, I'm kind of painting up my thoughts to you. I'm designating
them. So, you just naturally, by not being mindful in regard to that, you naturally assume
that your thoughts just kind of flow into these words. But there is no clear point. Well,
there is no point at all when your thought suddenly changes into the word. So, that which
was a thought enters the domain of the speech. No. There isn't. There isn't a single thread
that connects them. You have a domain of thoughts, then you have the domain of speech. You have
the domain of the body. And they are completely independent of each other and they can't mix.
They can't connect. They can't interfere. So, how do you speak then? If there is nothing
that comes from your thoughts, you speak by having thoughts. And then, by breaking into
the sound, speech. But that's it. There is no smooth transition.
Presence of thoughts has the possibility of it being simultaneously replicated, so to
speak in the domain of speech, hence the verbal action, the power of speech. So, how to
purify your speech until, you know, keep the wholesome speech? Well, if you're obviously,
if you're mindful first, if you're mindful of unwholesome speech, so you don't do it,
you're restrained. Even if you don't necessarily see the purpose, you're restrained from the unwholesome,
unwholesome, saying unwholesome things, gossip, slander, malicious speech, greedy speech,
anything like that. You abstain from that. And then by not cultivating these, by not maintaining
these unwholesome habits, habits that are rooted in greedy version delusion. So, basically,
by having your speech restrained, then you can start to discern the negative, that negative
in regard to the act of speech. And the negative is just the presence of the mouth.
That's what, to me it just seems important to you. If you said not to appropriate the mouth,
because once you don't appropriate the mouth, whoops, that's the only way. Then, well, it kind
of solves a lot of the issues. You can, you can see, you can look at it basically,
like, if you see this physical mouth that's kind of moving with the tongue and teeth and so on,
if you see that, as that matter, because of which you're able to speak, the thoughts are
able to be replicated in the main of speech. Because of that physical mouth, but in many
mind, full of the physical mouth, you won't be able to appropriate, you won't be confusing
the two. Because why? You see, it's necessary cause, necessary determination, which is presence
of the physical mouth. As negative as that mouth is, in your experience, when you're engaged
in speech, it's still a real thing. And it is a physical mouth, presence of the physical
mouth without it, it would just be simply inconceivable to speak. And obviously, you don't know
how to speak immediately. And that just shows you the inherent separation between these
domains, the verbal domain, and the mental domain. The baby can't speak, takes quite some time.
You start making sound, then you start hearing the sounds that you yourself are making.
They don't really hear the sounds that others are making. And then basically you start fabricating
the connections between the thoughts, words, and verbal expressions. And then obviously,
the whole assumption grows in regard to it, but you just start assuming the same. I speak
what I think, what I think is what I speak. So it needs to be, it needs to happen. You
need to have that proliferation in order to be able to discern it and then not appropriate.
But in terms of the meditation, yeah, you can just be mindful of the presence of the mouth.
Nothing in particular, don't observe your tongue, or whatever, roof, top of your mouth,
or something like that, it's ridiculous. Just the fact that you have mouth present. So
you can basically be mindful of the front of your face, so to speak, or the whole head
if you want, but basically the front, usually. So if you're mindful of your mouth, and
when that mouth speaks, when that mouth is making sounds, or the possibility that mouth
might be making sounds, well, you start putting, putting like a, like a, like a buffer between
you speaking. Because you might want to speak, but it's your mouth that speaks. You can't
possibly speak. If you could speak, you wouldn't need mouth to speak. But the speech is inseparable
from the mouth. It's difficult when you, when you're not speaking. And you're, you're mindful
of the mouth. It's kind of easier. But when you start speaking, it's, you made it lose
the mindfulness. And that's the whole point. You train that mindfulness, or rather you refine
it to the point that it ascends in the general background to such a level whereby even
when you speak, that mindfulness doesn't get disturbed. And by not having that mindfulness
disturbed, they won't be any room for introducing the assumption of I am speaking. And
the mouth as a, as a, as a, as a physical organ has lots of other, obviously, significance.
As we spoke before, you know, it is a point of, of consumption. You consume things because
the self, it's most closely and probably, like, we're probably right off the bat, as
you consume it, you're born, the baby starts and then find its ends of self, underlying
tendencies towards the self with the mouth. That's what you're putting things in your mouth,
everything, like objects, anything, because that is a way of assimilating them, of appropriating
them, of consuming them, or just of, of, of getting to know them.
It's true. Get it. It feels like you are touching it with your sense of self. Then obviously
that kind of grows further, and then you have various expressions that they develop on
top of that. So then the speech and all that. But basically, always, the food will always
remain connected to the mouth, and activating. And even, even centrality in general, it's,
the mouth plays quite a big significance. Because it is a, it is a, it is a, it is almost
like a symbol of assimilation, or out of stance for the, the assumption of, of, of assimilation
and consumption, or simply said appropriation. Because when you eat the food, the food
doesn't change in the sense of, it doesn't really become, it doesn't disappear from
the world, so to speak. It remains external. The food that was on the table, it's now
mashed up in a stomach. But that stomach and the table, they're all part of the external
world. Which means, consuming the food is just having a revolve around these external
things. It doesn't actually get inside, in me. I don't consume it, because I am not in
the stomach. The stomach, stomach is external, same with mouth is external, same as the
table is external, to the, to the sense of self. By the sense of self assumes your
ownership, so it just feels as if it is on the other side, on the inside of the self,
so to speak. And that's why the food is always that, that kind of subtle, subtle maintenance
of that, of that assumption. By eating unmindfully, you are basically maintaining the assumption
of the self is consuming the food that's now disappearing behind it. It's being taken.
But it doesn't, it stays in that external world. It just goes through the mouth, contacts
you with a, with a, with a, with a taste. And then stays there basically, stays in the
external world. That's the thing, you can be moderate in eating. Oh, you know, you can
choose, I'll have a little bit of this, a little bit of that. But if you, but completely,
it's a complete blur. Of course. Or I will, I'll have this. And then I'll wriggle
out, and then I'll bow, and then I'll eat my, to carry now, and then I'll bow, wriggle
out, just, you know, pets. But that, I mean, that's just like a random observance, basically.
Yeah. That means nothing. Yeah. Of course, you know, if you're, if you're picking out and
eating calisely, well, this is not the only way, but then either way, like you can abstain
from food entirely and still not develop any wisdom when you got there. There's the,
the only way, which is supposed to eat the Buddhist Jesus mindfully. Yeah. And, well,
how else than other to watch? And mindfulness, basically already implies a, a degree of
discernment and knowledge. So it's not, mindfulness is nothing to do with little ritual you
might observe before you're meal and during your meal. Be present with the taste. Be present
with the taste. Well, I mean, if you want to do that, sure, but that might not necessarily
lead you to anything, because the taste is present one way or the other. You can't, and
that's, that's the point that you need to recognize, which you don't. Oh, I must be present
with this taste whereby you imply that if you're not present with a taste, what, the taste
is gone or the taste has in the reason of the taste. No, the taste is there, which means
you have no choice but to be present with the taste. So I'm making the extra effort in
top weight of being present with the taste when you are present with the taste. And that
is, that is the, again, the taste or other distances in themselves are also in themselves
a, a point. Well, it's basically a point where, where, where people, where people get deceived.
As I said, you, like in this particular example, when, when, when a person thinks, or other
person assumes, like eating the food and the disappearance of the food through the mouth
and chewing, stands for the assimilation of that food, stands for consumption, disappears
the self-tuket. But basically, that food has just moved from one external point to another
external point, from the table into the stomach down the toilet drain and so on, part of it
is staying in the body. But even that body, that table, that stomach, all of that remains
external. So there is absolutely no point from that external, from which this food can
arise and get close to the sense of self. What does get close to the sense of self is
the taste, contacted by taste. And that's the thing. That's why that confusion sets. Same
goes with the sight, with the ear. Because your eyes are objects in the world. Objects
you see in the world are objects in the world. But the vision in itself, it's not quite
isn't it? You see the world, but the vision in itself, that which you can't see, where
is that then? So you just assume that to be where yourself is, so to speak, because
it's not here nor there. And by taking that up, then you create this division between
external, the sense of objects and internal, me. Well, basically, you appropriate the
sense places. You appropriate, you end up appropriating your body by not having your mind
developed in regard to the contact, contact by eyes, contact by sight, contact by taste,
contact by sound vision, or vision, yeah. But if you were to see that, be the external
object, be it an internal sense space, such as your tongue, or your eye, eye organ, wood,
like okay, let's go back to the taste. So if there's no, if there's no tongue, if there's
no mouth, and if there is nothing to be consumed, eat it, put it in the mouth, wood, a taste
be possible to arise. It's inconceivable. You have to, not just that it wouldn't be impossible
to arise, it would be also impossible to remain standing if these things disappear. You
might have an arisen taste, but suddenly, well, suddenly you lose your sense of taste,
you lose your tongue, you lose your head. Can this taste remain? It can't. Which means
no matter how closely, taste, or vision, or sounds pressure you, they also remain external,
because they are rooted in external, and they can break away from it, it's inconceivable.
But once you see that the internal sense space as external, as external, as external, as
external objects, as even more external. Yeah. Because if you see the, the, the internal
sense as external, in the body, belonging to the body, over there, then that middle part
of the vision, that sounds, it's, where, where, you say where is it, but I think it's
so in between. It is in between, and it stays in between. Yeah. It's just when you're
appropriate in between, then, well, then you, you, you, you make it liable to, to, to
being underlined, underlined, by the, by the tendency of the eye, the tendencies of the
nose, but as the tendency of the tongue, one said, eye is not appropriated. If you don't
appropriate eye, if you're mindful of it, properly, say, if your mindfulness is properly
established in regard to the, the eye organs, the present in the world, is that because
of which the sight is there in the first place? Yeah. If that's established, then exactly
there is nothing underlining, underlying that whole picture. Because everything is now
pushed externally. I, everything is now not taken to be mine, not taken to be pertaining
to me. So there is nothing underlying it. There's nothing underneath. But you have to be
prepared. If you otherwise assume, you always assume. Like when you're eating, basically,
your, your, your, your tongue, your sense of taste, your sense of taste, that is assumed
as underneath. That is assumed as mine. And the consumption of the food, the disappearance
of the food is disappearing under that.
But it isn't even enough that that's a further investigation, like you think it's
like internal senses, then you're investigating the external form and so on, sense, sense
of, sense objects, and then you're investigating vision and sound and taste. Okay. But do you
have to go there for? No, I wasn't talking about the investigation of it, because I already
implies quite a lot of wrong views. People investigating end up explaining it to
themselves how these things work. That's irrelevant.
I mean, I just, I'm not talking about investigation. I'm talking about the direct discernment of
the, and I think that's what you're aiming at as well. The direct discernment of the
sense base as that which is already in the world. And by being that which is already in
the world, like a sense organ, you can't really control it. You have no say. I mean,
you're, your, your eyes are there working quite an intricate organs with all the nerves
and optic nerves and so on. And you have absolutely, absolutely no access to it. And you have
no say in it. So if that thing fails for whatever random reason, your sight is gone, your
whole world of vision, everything you've ever seen, everything you ever would see, everything
you're seeing right now, everything that you ever felt on account of what you've seen,
everything that you ever done that you would do on account of what you've seen is gone.
Because none of that would be able to remain standing if these fleshy eye organs are not
there. So you recognize, oh, I can't possibly own this even if I were to, you know, to make
the extra effort to do so. You can't. You can say, and if you start seeing that, then
you can even say, oh, these are my eyes, but they won't actually stand for the assumption
of my mind, because it's, it's obvious. It just becomes obvious. It's, well, it's not
the chair to sit and then stop owning it. It means seeing directly, automatically results
in disowning it. And disowning everything else that stands upon it, which is everything
else, basically. Yeah. So that's, that's what I'm talking about, like, I got into a look
at the things that stand upon it. No, of course not. No, no, no, that's a complete mistake.
That's basically the, the, the, the science, the worldly science, or looking at the things
or psychology of explaining things and drawing parallel connections and external, nothing
to do by staying mindful of that sense base. The body, the body, they, properly, that's
enough. Well, it's enough for you because you've heard enough in terms of what you're
supposed to see. But if somebody just comes to it with all the wrong views that they
still have, and then you say them, just be mindful of that, it won't mean anything. And
certainly won't result in anything. So yeah, you can just be mindful of that when you
know how to regard it. So as often they talk in the sutras, so how should I regard the
eye? Well, regard it as not mine, not me, not I am. Then yeah, yeah, be mindful of that
because that attitude is already implied through practice, through training, that attitude,
you basically use the future mindfulness with that attitude. And you can only do so when
you know what the attitude is, that needs to be developed. The attitude of this on it
is a preparation, this passion. Yes, not a thought. No, this is not mine. No, no, no,
that's already two course. That thought, it's already, it's already two, two course. Like
if you're trying to, you know, to pull a, pull a thread through the, through the eye of
the needle, well, if the thread's too big, it's just one foot. So you need to refine it,
refine it until it can go through it. So show you can say attitude is a formal thought,
but it's much subtle way of thought, then, actually, of course, think of it.
Because saying the eye is not yours, it's different. It doesn't mean anything, yeah. So watching
that space, the space as a face, your mouth, that space. Well, that can bring you closer
to, to, to, to seeing your sense objects, sorry, your sense basis, such as eyes, nose,
ears, tongue, well, even face, touch, basically, their head is the foremost, you know, their
head is your identity, the face. So having the mindfulness established to the
four of their face, in regards to their face, yeah, you're having a mindfulness
established in regard to the sense basis, and being, and not, not appropriating, or
sure say being mindful of that sense basis, secludes me from, well secludes you from
anything that is, that those sense basis are subjected to. Anything, yeah. So here,
a large sound, or see something intense sight, but because of my mindfulness to be developed
strong enough, you'd see that that sight or sound pertains to the actual sense organ,
that is out there with that sight and sound, not out of you, because you stopped assuming
that now. But the thing is not, you've stopped assuming the body, you see it where, where
it is out there. So you can't, you can't be inside it, but you are not exactly anyway,
in particular either. Yeah. So those, those visions, those tastes can't go into you. No,
because you is not rooted anymore to that, which goes visions and sounds pertain to. So
through the appropriation of the sense basis, or through being, through not having mindfulness
developed to the extent necessary in regard to the sense basis, that which those sense
basis are subjected to, you are subjected to. These sounds enter you. These, these visions
arise you, even sight you, the taste arises in you. So it's all me in regard to me. But
if you become established in regard to this sense organs, as the organs, as external organs,
which is the only way you can be established in regard to them, that internal dimension,
that internal assumption of them, will fade. Why? Because with that proper mindfulness
established, it becomes apparent that the sight's pertain to the eyes, the sounds pertain
to the ears. So they keep working the way they've always done. Exactly. Yeah. And you
recognize there was never even room for your sense of self, and it was just not knowing
that there was no room, you assumed it there. That's why in the scene, there will only
be the scene, in the hurt, there will only be the hurt. And there will also be an
other scene. It just carries on. Yeah. For scene, there's seen, in hurt, there's hurt,
in taste, there's taste. There's nothing else. Because there's, there's this merely thought
that you won't see anything anymore. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. But that's, that's not, not
the case. Yes. Anything further away from your, from that convergence point, from your
mouth. It's, you know, anything further away, even down your body. It's just, it's just
a step away, even further away. It's exactly the convergence of the mouth, the face. It's,
it's basically the way the body is structured. You know, if your eyes were on top of your
palms or something, you think it wouldn't work the same way, but they're not. All, all
of the, the major sense organs are based in your head. Thus, the head, thus, the face. Yeah.
And that's it. They're all based on the front of your face. And years to decide, but still
close to the front. So then, if, if you're mindful of, of, of that physical presence,
as that, because of which, the vision in itself, the sounds, the, the, the sphere of, of
sounds, the, the, the smells, taste, touches, is there, then basically you cease to be liable
to it. Or rather, you're not being affected by it. But can, can anyone be mindful of that
prop, not, not anyone can just be mindful of that. Well, no, because, uh, mindfulness, it's
not just the pure awareness, which I think such thing doesn't, doesn't exist. It's the
pure awareness. It's not aware of anything. So mindfulness, the right mindfulness, which
basically, inseparable from, uh, discernment, that can then lead to the, the, the proper
knowledge of the nature of things. So you need to, you can't just just be mindful of
your, yeah, because that, yeah, be mindful of my face and then what? No, you need to be mindful
in the right way. So you need to discern it. That's why you can be mindful of your face.
Doesn't mean anything. Uh, but if you're mindful of your face, as that, because of which,
the entire world that's right, simultaneously present there, is standing right there,
then you, you're mindful of, basically, of the relationship between the two, of the determination
and that, which is being determined and that determination, it's, it's, it's basically
that face, the presence of these sense organs, operating sense organs. And see, there is
a whole world that simultaneously stands upon that, including your sense of self, upon
the presence of these sense organs. And you can't even, on the level of your abstraction,
you can't even conceive how it would be if you were, to be in control of these sense organs.
Control the workings, the inner workings of the, of the eye, of the lump of flesh, that
is your eye, inconceivable. You can observe it in the others, but there will never be your
working eye, because that's what you see with your working eye. And then you can infer,
that's my working eye. But if that inference, so to speak, does not stand as the determination
for the world that simultaneously present as you are speaking it, as you are seeing
it, then it will not be seen correctly. That's why it looks the same externally. The description
of the Buddha gave of the senses and the description of the modern medical science tells us. This
describes the eye as a flesh organ, but there is a big difference. The Buddha described
that, and that, he described it as a present phenomenon, because that's the only way
you can describe it. You can't possibly see your eye directly with your eye. You can
infer its presence through other senses, which is the same thing the scientists would do
just in regard to other people senses. But the difference is, for Buddhist practice,
that inference, when you infer your eye as the reason for your sight, you include simultaneously
the present sight in that inference. Which means, the whole thing, the whole inference
happens on the basis of mindfulness. So you start discerning the simultaneous principle
of the determination, and that which is being determined, that simultaneously standing
upon it. Scientists doesn't do that. He can't do that because his assumptions of himself,
of his world are already far out external in the world. So even when he looks at the other
people's eyes, even if he says, my eyes are like the same, that doesn't pertain anywhere
nearly to that, which his eyes actually are in that experience, as that determination
upon which the whole world of his stands. So by, again, being mindful of the sense
of the basis, then seeing them directly in a very mindful mind. Well, as I said, that
is the closest you can see them. That is the director of seeing them as these third-party
objects that are out there in the world. But everybody can do that. But not everybody
can basically see them as simultaneously as the termination of that which you're seeing.
I, them. So you can be thinking about your eyes or think about their just vision as a
domain. And if you see those, all of those thoughts, all the thoughts that have resulted
on account of it, all of the thoughts that will result in the future, on account of
anything seen, that whole sphere, that whole domain, is right there and then simultaneously
determined by the still working presence of the flashy eyes in your head as you are thinking
those very thoughts. And that's what no scientist can do. Because if they were able to do that,
they would basically fall back or rather they would abandon the scientific view, which
is the view of the external realities and so on. And then, if you see that simultaneously,
and if you cultivate that simultaneously principle, then no matter what, what else simultaneously
arises, no matter how inciting, how frightening the sight might be, it won't actually neither
inside you, nor frightening you. Why? Because the mindfulness remains unwavering, properly
established in regard to the presence of the flashy organ dera, the simultaneous calls
determination, reason for the sight in the first place, whatever particularly that sight
might be. No, because what you are not appropriating then is your thought of what you think the
eye is, that's then not being seen as simultaneously determined by the presence of the flashy eye
in your head. But if your mindfulness starts revolving around the presence of the flashy
eye in your head, that means your mindfulness becomes established upon that, which is going
to be there for as long as you live basically, which is another way of just saying developing
mindfulness of the body to the extent necessary for the final knowledge. Whether it's eye,
nose, ear, or basically sense basis, it's the body. Again, you can do that wrongly in
the same sense you just described that you can be wrongly mindful of your eyes. Oh, I'm
mindful of the body, I'm observing the body. But that leaves the observer, or rather the
assumption of the observer out. But if you don't observe the body, if you refine the body
as already there, because of which the entire actions that you're doing right now aimed
at this body, such as mindfulness of the body or whatever else, depend upon the presence
of the body in the first place, then there is no room for that observer to step outside
of it. Everything is included, because everything becomes undermined by your recognition that
it all depends upon the external presence of this physical body, which I have no control
of. You have the rest of the world, the presence of this body, so mindful of that any of the
background that rest of the world. So, you don't want to be doing mindfulness, you want
to develop to the point where mindfulness does you. Where your sense of self becomes secondary
and regard to the mindfulness.
So, there's a clue from unholesome thoughts, there's a clue from central place, and some
clue from unholesome thoughts. It's not a coping of their sense-basis, it's a clue from
the body, mindful of the body, when he is secluded or separated or detached from unholesome thoughts.
Well, not detached, in a sense, but basically they are rising around, wholesome thoughts
cannot be affecting you, cannot be appropriate, because you're mindful of the basis of their
rising. So, if you disown the body, even temporarily, so to speak, nothing that comes on a
kind of body, including thoughts, can't be yours, can't be affecting you, and that's
what's being recognized in the first genre, that pleasure of seclusion, pleasure of confidence,
of, oh, you know, you're safe here, nothing that arises on account of your experience as
a whole can touch you. What is safe? Why does anything need to be safe? You can just
have sense of safety in regard to these things. Well, you can say, I am safe, but they
won't stand for the sense of I am, in terms of appropriating the sense-basis, because
through not appropriating the sense-basis, you become safe. But sure, if you want to designate
it, you have to say it like that, there's not a way. The sense of safety is, like, I go
inside, close the door, I am safe, from those- Yeah, well, you can extrapolate, but the nature
of feeling safe, and just taking to take it up to the ultimate level, where you feel safe
from your own senses. When you feel safe from the sights, you feel safe from thoughts.
There doesn't mean they still, they don't arise. They're very much arise, but they can't
take you with them, wherever they go. So you don't move in regard to the movement of thinking
and pondering, or in regard to the movement that that thinking and pondering is.
So, I can say there is safety from, like, there is seclusion from those senses, from my
own wholesome thoughts, there is safety, there's joy from- Yes, there's the joy from seclusion.
To say it, I am. Well, you can say it like that, but as an experience, you don't feel
that I am happy, I am happy. No, you don't feel that I am. Because you can't, you can't
feel that. Because otherwise, there wouldn't be a jam.
And any quality that comes about, from life, from being in the Jhana and state, developing
mind, any quality that comes about is not appropriate. Exactly, which is why Jhana is wholesome
in itself. Which is why another Jhana is not in oblivious state. His state fully founded
upon am wavering mindfulness. Which is inappropriate. Well, yeah, if the mindfulness is established
as sufficient as extended theory, appropriation becomes impossible. Because appropriation is
the result of mistake, misconception, unmindfulness, non-mindful effigy. Results in assumption,
result in appropriation, results in maintenance of ignorance. Practicing the opposite
and does that. So that you can only, the only person that can be mindful, right, mind,
as a person doesn't, appropriate in the mind. Basically, the person who knows what
mindfulness is, has knowledge of mindfulness. Mindfulness is not just a pure indifferent,
state, technique, method that you engage impossible. Because you can't do, you can't do Jhana
and then get to state where you don't appropriate things anymore. Sorry, I don't follow that.
Like, practice Jhana, practice mindfulness of breathing. To enter the state of non-mindfulness.
No, no, no, no. In order to enter the Jhana, you order the need to disappropriate.
In order to, in order for mind to get settled in Jhana, the mindfulness needs to have been
practiced. Well, quite a lot. And develop such a wide basis of mindfulness whereby it gets
established regardless of what's happening around you. And then on certain occasions,
you can then just dwell on certain aspects of that establishment and enter the Jhana.
And certain aspects of that establishment is the aspect of seclusion, aspect of safety,
aspect of confidence, aspect of thinking and pondering.
And directing the mind to those aspects. Exactly. So someone tells you that those aspects
are found in such a state. Yes, if your basis of mindfulness is developed to such a wide extent,
that already contains all these things and you already see them clearly, then all you need to do is
hear what the first Jhana is and by thinking about it, you enter it.
Which is exactly what happened to Mahamogala. When the Buddha told him,
you should practice the first Jhana instead of your mind in the first Jhana.
And then he thought, okay, so he went to the forest, sat under the tree,
or on the rock, a country member, and said, first Jhana, first Jhana, what is first Jhana?
What did the Lord mean by saying first Jhana? And then he just recollected all the things
that the Buddha said the first Jhana is and recollected them. He entered the first Jhana.
Why? Because his mindfulness was already developed to such an extent that he could discern these things.
Most people can't, because most people mindfulness is not a solution.
And it never will be, as long as the practice of meditation, in other comments,
revolves around methods and techniques of observance that somehow leads you into a state
of most often oblivion.
So, just like, for example, the mindfulness of the body is used to.
And he says, here, a Bikku, going to the forest on the root of a tree,
where empty heart sits down and then fold his legs crosswise,
sets his body erect, and establishes mindfulness in front of him.
Or establishes mindfulness.
Mindfulness.
Party will come.
Around his mouth or around his face.
Because that's what party will come means, literally, around the mouth.
Around the mouth.
So, that's already his established mindfulness.
Correctly.
If you say even if you dispute that, if you say it doesn't mean around the mouth,
means to the front of the face, basically.
It means that.
So, by establishing your mind, your mindfulness in regard to the front of the collection
of your sense of basis in front of yourself.
Pretty much.
Into yourself.
Basically, discerning the reasons that underlie your sense of self,
as an external given things, which means, oh, if I can't own the reasons of my sense of self,
if I can't own and control that, which determines my very sense of self,
which is this sense of self, I can't possibly have this sense of self as mine either.
And that's what Anata is.
It's not self.
It's not no self.
So, that which you're taking to be yourself, is still stands there.
But now, it's seen as something they cannot be yours.
Thus, it's not self anymore.
Not myself.
Impossible to own.
Here in the first section, let's see.
So, he establishes mindfulness.
Mindfulness in front of him.
Ever mindful.
He breathes in.
He breathes out.
So, by having that established mindfulness, properly in front of yourself,
I'll just say that in front of your face, in front of your appropriation.
Then let the body do it, see.
So, you notice him now.
So, he got that established.
But from a different direction.
It must know that there's the breath.
And then you do mindfulness.
That's mindfulness.
And then you can also notice when you're anchored in that mindfulness.
You can also then notice the sense of I am behind that breath.
But now you're noticing it from that external anchored position in front.
So, that's self.
That's quite everywhere.
But now you are not there with it.
You will be that mindfulness to the fore.
Mindfulness around the mouth.
Mind from the front.
So, that becomes now your viewing point.
There has no room for the self in it.
So, then you see that you see that body breathing.
You see in breath, out breath, whatever.
You see the act of breathing.
And then you even see on top of the act of breathing,
in the further distance you see that sense of self.
But seeing it from a different angle means, oh,
this is just another phenomenon that arises in regard to things
as pretty much all the other phenomena.
That arise.
Thus, it shares the nature of all the other phenomena,
which is they are not self.
And then it becomes apparent that you had your sense of self,
not because there was self,
but because you had the attitude of regarding things as mine.
People think, I am thus things as mine.
It's actually the way around.
It's because you regard things as mine.
You generate the sense of I am.
And seeing the self as not self
makes that which used to be taken as self,
now just remain a selfless individual.
Individual in terms of still like a reflection of the five aggregates.
So to speak, the experience as a whole has its own, basically.
Well, let's say it has like a meeting point,
which would be though the mind.
Like the sign of the mind that we spoke before as well.
It's like a meeting point, which is what usually they say,
well, always.
Where the set always sends a self to putogenesis.
It's where the sign of the mind is,
which means that's why it's rather easy to keep maintaining this
and self as most people don't even see that sign of the mind.
And seeing sign of the mind just means seeing mind as a phenomenon,
however general.
So unless you start seeing the sign of the mind,
you won't be able to establish the mindfulness of any kind that's relevant.
So like, for example, in such a paternal suit,
a mindful of the mind states,
all that requires proper seeing of the sign of the mind.
So you can discern it for what it is at the time.
And it's a very sign of the mind that is taking,
it's because it just feels like a center of the experience.
It's taken to be that sense of self, that sense of I am.
But if then you start developing through the mindfulness properly established,
pretty much like an external point of view towards your own internal situation,
then that sign of mind and that sense of self just become the extensions
of the same principle of arising phenomena,
in what I just said.
Like if your mindfulness is established in front,
and then there is an act of breathing,
and then while breathing, through the act of breathing,
you discern the sense of I am.
Your mind doesn't go back to the sense of it.
It stays in the front,
but now looks back and it sees that sense of I am still there,
which means it's another indifferent, independent phenomenon that has a reason
to seem like all the other phenomena,
which means it's not me, it's not mine, it's not I am.
It's not that special center.
There was always behind things, because now look,
I just see this one of the things, it's out there.
And if these things disappear, it cannot remain standing.
And if you want to look closer at that sense of I am,
most often you find like a basically being underlined by the notions
and concepts and images involving your own face,
your own physical appearance,
your own point of view of the appropriated eyes,
here, inside.
But now that here, inside, is seen as just external,
another thing, external thing,
a reason upon external determinations.
So then no matter how internally it is,
it cannot be internally taken as mine anymore.
So how do you get rid of subjectivity?
Well, you don't get rid of it.
You just stop regarding it as yours,
then it seems to be a subjectivity.
It just becomes your individuality.
And you stop regarding it as yours,
not by saying this is not mine,
because it becomes another part of your subjectivity.
But by developing point of view,
there has no room for it.
And that point of view is the view of in front,
around the mouth, around the face,
around the head,
or ahead of the center places.
And mindfulness is not the other way.
It can be mindful that you have to have a body,
only have to be alive.
Yeah, of course.
But mindfulness being much larger,
you know, larger in a sense,
it covers all.
It can cover all things.
It can be in front of everything.
Well, it can't be in front of the body.
Mindfulness.
Yeah.
I mean, sorry.
It can be in front in the sense of the practice.
But it can't go underneath the body.
It can't go underneath the matter,
which is why it's possible to be mindful in the first place.
It can't go underneath.
It's because the body is already there.
The sense bases are already there.
You can establish your mindfulness upon that,
upon the physical presence of the sense organs,
upon the physical presence of the body out there.
But that mindfulness can't step outside of there.
They have been mindful in stepping outside of the five aggregates.
And that's impossible.
But I know what you mean.
When you say that mindfulness includes everything.
That's in that mindfulness.
That includes everything.
Within that, you go further and you find the body already there.
Within that mindfulness.
So, sure.
From the point of view of putuginous world, that mindfulness includes everything.
But you don't stop there.
You look at it further and then you see that that mindfulness basically founded
upon the presence of a physical body that you have no control over.
Hence, you can't appropriate that mindfulness.
It's simply no room for any subjectivity, impossible.
And it's good to keep drilling this.
Because on some days all these things will make perfect sense.
Everything will feel like it's all in the place.
Then two or three days later, the doubt sets in.
And then you just, it doesn't seem to fit with anything.
That's exactly the point.
Then you keep drilling until it falls in place.
Then it falls out of place.
And then it will stop falling out of place.
Because you widen the basis of your mindfulness.
You widen the basis of your discernment.
And now the doubt cannot enter it from any angle.
So, when the doubt does enter it, instead of filling a coma,
goodness, whether it's wrong, no.
You take that as basically having your work cut out for you.
Oh, see, the doubt can enter it from this angle.
That's the angle I have to work now.
So, to remove the doubt.
So, in terms of the genres again, but in particular with the suitors.
This is with the joy that is born of seclusion.
He drenches, steep fills, evades this body,
so that there's no part of his whole body and pervaded for the joy.
He doesn't do it from his point of view of the sense of self.
He doesn't do it from his subjectivity.
He does it from the externally established mindfulness to the fore.
From that point, he pervades this body.
Intentionally.
Yeah.
But even that intention won't be appropriated then,
because his mind is established to the fore.
Around the mouth.
Around the converging point.
So, in the mind is established around the converging point.
Looking back from the converging point,
then he pervades and spews this and so on.
Everything that's on the other side of the converging point,
which is the entire bodily domain.
And he sends himself.
Wow.
It's not there at the time, but that's where he sends self rise.
No, no.
Obviously, it speaks of the bodily parts.
See, you gain your mind for the converging point.
Yeah, all of those bodily parts, all of them.
I mean, is there anything that could stand for basically the physical aspect of your body?
Your body, basically.
All of those parts can serve as a coverage point if taken up readily.
And saying, seeing as a converging point is nothing other than saying,
seeing is that because of which your whole world is already there.
Seeing it as a necessary condition to the experience as a whole.
Seeing it as a determination to your existence.
Of your entire life.
And everything that comes with it, emotions, feelings,
happiness, sadness, ideas, hopes, ambitions, everything.
You're in feces.
You're in feces, nails, hair.
Oh, so your whole life stands upon the presence of these things.
That's nothing to rejoice over.
Nothing to feel passionate about.
On the contrary, it's something to recognize.
Oh, this will come to a abrupt end.
Always, death is always abrupt.
So this will come to an abrupt end.
And it's actually quite displeasing, quite frightening.
The fact that it depends upon these random external things
that are composed in this body, random matter, random elements,
there absolutely no say over, no control over,
can't even conceive it in the wildest of abstractions,
can't conceive how it would be to control these elements.
You're just inconceivable, yet my whole life depends upon it.
Everything.
And that's like any passion towards it,
any desire towards it, any joy towards it.
It would disappear.
So for somebody who is still very much inside of it
that seems very frightening,
they would seem very frightening.
Oh my goodness, so what?
The banner is a joyless state on the contrary.
The joy, well basically, say you have a joy
on account of drinking a pleasant beverage,
that's full of poison.
You can't taste, smell, touch, see, nothing.
You don't know, you can't access that poison through any senses,
but you know it's there.
And it's the most pleasant beverage.
That's a seemingly from the suitors.
So if you don't know the poison's there,
you'd be enjoying that beverage, wouldn't you?
Because it's just pleasing in every possible aspect.
And then somebody tells you there is poison in it,
there will kill you.
So would, by not drinking it then,
you would give up the joy of drinking it,
the joy of the pleasant taste, the joy of the pleasant consistency
or whatever smell, the joy of the pleasant drink.
You would give that up, but you would then replace it
with a much greater joy of knowing
that you are basically not going to be killed
by enjoying that poison.
Oh, my goodness, I saved my own life.
So basically by abandoning the joys of worldly sensual life,
the joys that arise on a basis of sensual pleasures,
you abandon all the dangers with it,
and that can result in quite a non-worldly joy,
joy of freedom, joy of liberation.
It gets to sleep in the joy, let's leave you alone.
And this game says,
when it's developed and cultivated in mind,
most of the body, Mara cannot find opportunity
and support within the same other days.
But Mara is yourself.
Yeah.
He is you.
It's a very dear sense of self that Mara is.
So if you remove yourself from it,
Mara can find any basis on it.
And he's supporting you.
He can see it basically.
So the mindfulness is the wakeful one.
He always mindfulness sees you.
Right.
Yeah.
The mindfulness is established upon the right order of things,
or the physical senses beforehand,
simultaneously present with things that depend upon them.
That's the mindfulness you are not doing.
That's the mindfulness that includes you,
as opposed to you performing it.
So you find that mindfulness.
You establish it upon that which is already there,
the presence of the body.
Again.
Now, in that sense, I'm mindful of the body,
or I'm observing bodily sensations.
No, that's putting you first.
Still, keeping you in the center,
and then you're observing these things that are...
No.
You want to forget about your sense of self,
and establish your mindfulness upon these external things.
There needs to be seen as that,
because of which, well,
you are able to even look at any external things.
Or internal, or internal,
any external things.
It precise them all.